## Homework 8 Implemment NSGA-II

### Running Instructions 
  1. Clone the github repository fss16groupG from https://github.com/akhan7/fss16groupG.git
  2. Navigate to ./fss16groupG/code/8
  3. run testGA.py
 
###Abstract
The objective is to extend the implementation of GA done in the workshops to implement NSGA-II algorithm with the two types of fitness evaluations- Binary Domination with Cuboid Sorting and Continuous Domination. We test the algorithm by running it with each of the DTLZ 1, DTLZ 3, DTLZ 5 and DTLZ 7 models with 2, 4, 6, 8 objectives and with 10, 20, 40 decisions. Default parameters are used during the implementation and hypervolume is used as the performance measure. We repeat this experiment with 20 iterations.

###Introduction
**Genetic algorithm** is a meta-heuristic algorithm which is inspired from natural selection. It traditionally works on binary data but can be adopted for other data types as well. It uses techniques like Cross over, mutation and Elitism to evaluate fitness generate better population of candidate solutions.

**NSGA-II** is a standard genetic algorithm with state-of-the-art selection operator for multi-objectives. The algorithm for NSGA-II is given as:
  * Divide candidates into frontiers:
  * For some small number:
    * Keep the top i-frontiers until we reach that number
    * If you fill up half way through a frontier,
    * Delete some using crowd-pruning

The fitness evaluation of the population is done through two major algorithms, Binary Domination with Cuboid Sorting and Continuous Domination. 

Binary domination is a very fast and simple algorithm which is defined as follows:
  * Consider two points one and two.
  * For every objective o and t in one and two, o <= t
  * At least one objective o and t in one and two, o < t

However, it is not the best method to evaluate fitness as it can be too simplistic and we need a more robust way of testing our NSGA-II implementation. Continuous Domination comes to the rescue here. It too finds the difference between the objectives generated by the candidate solutions but raises it to and exponential power so that the difference becomes very loud and clear. For more number of objectives in a candidate, Binary Domination works worse and leads to crowding of the pareto frontier. However Continuous Domination works better for more number of objectives and does not lead to crowding of the frontier as the difference between candidates is calculated on an exponential level. Hence intricate differences get noticed.

### Related Work:
In the famous paper *A Fast and Elitist Multiobjective Genetic Algorithm: NSGA-II, Kalyanmoy Deb, Associate Member, IEEE, Amrit Pratap, Sameer Agarwal, and T. Meyarivan* the authors introduced the idea of non dominated sorting based genetic algorithm because of the following problems with traditional evolutionary algorithms:
  1.  O(M N<sup>3</sup>) computational complexity (where M is the number of objectives and N is the population size).
  2.  nonelitism approach.
  3.  the need for specifying a sharing parameter.

The NSGA-II algorithm proposed by the authors used the fast dominated sorting approach with O(M N<sup>2</sup>) computational complexity. Also, a selection operator was presented that creates a mating pool by combining the parent and offspring populations and selecting the best (with respect to fitness and spread) N solutions. Simulation results on difficult test problems showed that the proposed NSGA-II, in most problems, was able to find much better spread of solutions and better convergence near the true Pareto-optimal front compared to Pareto-archived evolution strategy and strength-Pareto EA—two other elitist MOEAs that pay special attention to creating a diverse Pareto-optimal front.

We carry this study forward by evaluating the performance of this non dominated sorting algorithm by testing it exhaustively with 4 models and 20 iterations. The results of this test are discussed below.


###Implementation 
  We implemeted the NSGA-II Algorithm on DTLZ 1 , 3, 5 , 7 each time with 2,4,6,8 objectives and 10, 20 , 40 decisions. 
  The default values of Genetic Algorithm have been used:
  
    * Probabilty for mutation: 0.05 
    * Probabilty for crossover: 1
    * Number of candidates: 100 
    * Number of generations: 10

###Results
  


###Conclusions


###Threats to Validity 
  1.  Only the default GA values were used for NSGA-II implementation. In this project we can improve the results by optimizing the parameters for GA.
  2.  Binary domination may not always work as well as we expect it to. Consider a not-so-common scenario where no candidate binary-dominates another candidate in the population. In such cases, how do we determine who the fittest individuals are?
  3.  As discussed earlier, we use the hypervolume as a metric of "goodness" of the best pareto frontier found. While this seems to be a promising approach, there is still much debate and ongoing research in this area.


###Future Work
  1.  We could generate multiple instances of the default values and generate the graphs for those and then decide which set of values work the best.
  2.  We could use other performance measures apart from hypervolume such as spread or IQR as well as the time for which the code runs and then do a comprehensive analysis between GA and NSGA-II.
  3.  We could use test the algorithm with other models and see how the performance of the algorithm changes with different models.


###References:-

 1. [Pseudo-code for Genetic Algorithm](http://www.cleveralgorithms.com/nature-inspired/evolution/genetic_algorithm.html)
 2. Book : Clever Algorithms by Jason Brownlee
 3. https://github.com/txt/mase/blob/master/lessthan.md
 4. https://github.com/txt/mase/blob/master/STATS.md
 5. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Genetic_algorithm


###Acknowledgements

   The study uses code found here :
 1.  This study uses code for Scott Knott given here : https://github.com/txt/mase/blob/master/src/doc/sk.py
 2.  This study used Hypervolume functions given here: 
     [Hypervolume Calculator](https://github.com/ai-se/storm/tree/master/PerformanceMetrics)
